Create 2020-12-19-LLVM IR to Assembly (#250)
sampsyo/cs6120: content/blog/2020-12-19-LLVM-IR-to-assembly.md

+++
title = "LLVM IR to Assembly"
[extra]
bio = """

>    Socrates Wong is a secound year PhD student at Cornell who intreset lies in Computer Archicture.

Reviewer: As with the previous post, *please run a spell checker* before submitting a revision. There are three typos in this line alone. Spell checkers are an amazing invention for those of us, including me, who make typos all the time!

Author: I will be fixing it shortly.  Turns out spell checker thought some blocks of text to be code and decided to ignore blocks of text.  I agree spell checker are awesome.

"""
[[extra.authors]]
name = "Socrates Wong"
+++

## Modifying LLVM’s IR to assembly on a existing ISA with different number of registers. 

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: "The original x86" (lower-case "the")

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: "there was only 8 registers" (there were)

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: "however" is a comma splice in the second sentence. Start a new sentence.

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: Capitalize MMX.

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: "processors(O3)" (add a space)

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: "advances topics" -> advanced topics

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (The original x86), there was only 8 registers and most of them are specialized, however in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 mmx registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors(O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers then what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advances topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers then architectural registers.  

Reviewer: then -> than

> This begs the question of do we actually need the number of registers offered by the modern ISA? Or can we go back to the traditional AX, BX, CX, DX, SI, DI, BP, SP registers?  Although at the current landscape in O-3 processors the incorporation of registers are relative cheap, such relationships may not hold true in other alternative processing methods.  Therefore such dimensions are worth a closer inspection, and that we as researcher should not take the cheap overhead for registers in modern O3 processors for granted. 

Reviewer: Maybe explain a little more about what those "alternative processing methods" are that you're imagining?

> This serves as the motivation of this project, in which I will modify LLVM assembly generation routine to generate code with less registers than what is offered by the traditional LLVM complier.  Furthermore, an informal comparison on the performance tradeoff based on the number of architectural registers is done.  

Reviewer: less -> fewer

> This serves as the motivation of this project, in which I will modify LLVM assembly generation routine to generate code with less registers than what is offered by the traditional LLVM complier.  Furthermore, an informal comparison on the performance tradeoff based on the number of architectural registers is done.  

Reviewer: s/complier/compiler/g, throughout

## What did I do?

> Although initially the project wants to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and have outstanding pull request in phabricator as of writing this blog post. [1](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community, however in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target configurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: wants -> wanted? or was?

> Although initially the project wants to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and have outstanding pull request in phabricator as of writing this blog post. [1](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community, however in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target configurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: Try using a proper link instead of linking the number 1 out of context. Like this:

```markdown
and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of this post
```

> Although initially the project wants to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and have outstanding pull request in phabricator as of writing this blog post. [1](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community, however in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target configurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: Capitalize "Phabricator."

> Although initially the project wants to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and have outstanding pull request in phabricator as of writing this blog post. [1](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community, however in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target configurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: "however" is again a comma splice (start a new sentence or use a ;).

> Although initially the project wants to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and have outstanding pull request in phabricator as of writing this blog post. [1](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community, however in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target configurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: "to utilizing" -> to use

> Hardest Part of the Project?

Reviewer: Should this be a Markdown heading?

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: What does it mean for an ISA to be "well maintained"? It's still the same 8086 ISA, with layers and layers of crap on top! Not sure I agree it has seen much maintenance in general. :smiley:

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: The second and third sentences should be combined with a comma.

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: "different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices" -> conventions (plural)

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: "It is not x86 is bad ISA" -> It is not that x86 is a bad ISA

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: Capitalize LLVM.

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: "code base" -> codebase

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and relatively well maintained. The x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling convention that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is bad ISA, but the current llvm code base in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC complier.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 makes it very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: "this makes x86-64 makes it"

## Results and Success?

> The project is a success in that I am able to report the performance compression with both microbenchmarks and on a FFT benchmark with varying number of architecture registers. 

Reviewer: I think it's "architectural registers," not "architecture registers," right?

> On the microbenchmarks, I have choose to compare the number of architecture registers of matrix multiplication in scalar execution, SEE, AVX4 and AVX8 on x86 machine.  For each one of the implementations, they are being compiled by a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.    

Reviewer: "have choose" -> have chosen

> The benchmark is primarily done by FFT, which is implement in SSE.   Which is also being complied by a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.     

Reviewer: "implement" -> implemented

> The benchmark is primarily done by FFT, which is implement in SSE.   Which is also being complied by a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.     

Reviewer: These two sentences should be joined with a comma (the second is a sentence fragment).

> The benchmark is done on a 4 core i9-9900K CPU with 16 GB ram in a ubuntu VM.  The results are reported cycle count with rdtsc and execute time is reported as wall time.  The results are verified by comparing the results of different implementations.

Reviewer: Capitalize RAM. Capitalize Ubuntu.

> The benchmark is done on a 4 core i9-9900K CPU with 16 GB ram in a ubuntu VM.  The results are reported cycle count with rdtsc and execute time is reported as wall time.  The results are verified by comparing the results of different implementations.

Reviewer: "execute time" -> execution time
"wall time" -> wall-clock time

The results are outlined as below:

> ##Microbenchmark :

Reviewer: Remove the colon.

> | Microbenchmark 4x4   matrix (min cycle) | gcc                   | clang  | clang (0.75) |

Reviewer: What does "min cycle" mean?

|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------|--------------|
| REF                                     | 227.76                | 214.98 | 214.8        |
| SSE                                     | 144.06                | 124.48 | 124.33       |
| AV_4mem                                 | 140.11                | 170.03 | 170.14       |

> | AVX_8                                   | 93.48                 | 98.99  | 95.75        |

Reviewer: What are the units here? Is this wall-clock seconds, or is it cycles?

> ## FFT benchmark:

Reviewer: Remove the colon.

Reviewer: Still has a colon.

| Exec time| gcc         | clang       | clang (0.75) |
|----------|-------------|-------------|--------------|
| Average  | 2833314.167 | 2548542.667 | 3081898      |

> | Min      | 2522625     | 2456454     | 2643296      |

Reviewer: Again, what are the units here? Cycles? (Are they different between the two benchmarks?)

> | Min      | 2522625     | 2456454     | 2643296      |

Reviewer: What are the average and minimum taken over? Were there multiple executions? If so, how many? If you have taken multiple measurements, can you report the statistics (at least the standard deviation)?

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: Capitalize GCC, as you have elsewhere.

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: "microbenchmark usually do not have much" -> microbenchmarks (plural)

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: "less registers" -> fewer registers

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: "the data is still not statistically": Did you perform a statistical test? If so, explain what test you used to reach the conclusion that the difference is not statistically significant.

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: then -> than

> Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmark usually do not have much register pressure as they often contain couple of operands.  In the FFT benchmark, our modified version with less registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of gcc and clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for gcc and modified clang version.  Although the data is still not statistically significant due to the small amount of sample size and the noise introduced my running code in non-dedicated hardware, it shows that the number of architectural registers has a greater impact on the average execution time then minimum execute time.   

Reviewer: "my" -> by

> Despite needing a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: "statically" -> statistically

> Despite needing a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: The first sentence is a fragment, so these two sentences need to be joined with a comma.

> Despite needing a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: "sub-set" -> subset

#Future Works?

> There is couple of steps I will need to accomplish.  The first and foremost is to abandon x86-64.  Although using x86-64 makes it a good academic exercise, it is nonetheless riddled with special exceptions and tons of specialized requirement to ensure support for legacy software.  This makes it very detrimental when attempting to isolate the performance gains and penalty.  The second point I would like to address is to use of a simulator to report the performance.   Compare to a live system with other workload, the simulator is both deterministic and is able to support multiple configurations to furthermore narrow down what really cause the performance decrease when the number of architectural registers decrease.  Lastly the incorporation of a comprehensive test bench to ensure that different workloads are fairly represented in the benchmarking.  

Reviewer: "There is couple" -> There are a couple

> There is couple of steps I will need to accomplish.  The first and foremost is to abandon x86-64.  Although using x86-64 makes it a good academic exercise, it is nonetheless riddled with special exceptions and tons of specialized requirement to ensure support for legacy software.  This makes it very detrimental when attempting to isolate the performance gains and penalty.  The second point I would like to address is to use of a simulator to report the performance.   Compare to a live system with other workload, the simulator is both deterministic and is able to support multiple configurations to furthermore narrow down what really cause the performance decrease when the number of architectural registers decrease.  Lastly the incorporation of a comprehensive test bench to ensure that different workloads are fairly represented in the benchmarking.  

Reviewer: "to use of" -> to use

> There is couple of steps I will need to accomplish.  The first and foremost is to abandon x86-64.  Although using x86-64 makes it a good academic exercise, it is nonetheless riddled with special exceptions and tons of specialized requirement to ensure support for legacy software.  This makes it very detrimental when attempting to isolate the performance gains and penalty.  The second point I would like to address is to use of a simulator to report the performance.   Compare to a live system with other workload, the simulator is both deterministic and is able to support multiple configurations to furthermore narrow down what really cause the performance decrease when the number of architectural registers decrease.  Lastly the incorporation of a comprehensive test bench to ensure that different workloads are fairly represented in the benchmarking.  

Reviewer: "Compare to" -> Compared to

> There is couple of steps I will need to accomplish.  The first and foremost is to abandon x86-64.  Although using x86-64 makes it a good academic exercise, it is nonetheless riddled with special exceptions and tons of specialized requirement to ensure support for legacy software.  This makes it very detrimental when attempting to isolate the performance gains and penalty.  The second point I would like to address is to use of a simulator to report the performance.   Compare to a live system with other workload, the simulator is both deterministic and is able to support multiple configurations to furthermore narrow down what really cause the performance decrease when the number of architectural registers decrease.  Lastly the incorporation of a comprehensive test bench to ensure that different workloads are fairly represented in the benchmarking.  

Reviewer: The last sentence is a fragment (needs a verb).

> #Credits and Acknowledgements 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Credits and Acknowledgements 
```

Reviewer: This needs the space at least to render correctly.

Reviewer: Still needs the space.

[LLVM](https://github.com/llvm-mirror/llvm/blob/master/CREDITS.TXT) and all its the contributors.  
[Fabian Giesen](https://github.com/rygorous) for his matrix multiplication benchmark.  

> [Zhiics](https://github.com/zhiics)’s for his FFT benchmark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Zhiics](https://github.com/zhiics) for his FFT benchmark
```

+++

> title = "Modifying LLVM’s IR to Assembly on a Existing ISA with Different Number of Registers."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title = "Modifying LLVM’s IR to Assembly on a Existing ISA with Different Number of Registers"
```

[extra]
bio = """

>    Socrates Wong is a second year PhD student at Cornell who interest lies in Computer Archicture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Socrates Wong is a second year PhD student at Cornell whose interests lie in Computer Archicture.
```

"""
[[extra.authors]]
name = "Socrates Wong"
+++

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrarily.  Originally when 8086 was released (the original x86), there were 8 registers' and most of them are specialized. However in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 MMX registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors (O-3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers than what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advanced topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo's algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers than architectural registers.  

Reviewer: I think you may want two blank lines after this so it renders as a separate paragraph?

This begs the question of do we actually need the number of registers offered by the modern ISA? Or can we go back to the traditional AX, BX, CX, DX, SI, DI, BP, SP registers?  Although at the current landscape in O-3 processors the incorporation of registers are relative cheap, such relationships may not hold true in other alternative processing methods. (PIM, GPGPU, DNA computing, quantum computing, et cetera.)  Therefore such dimensions are worth a closer inspection, and that we as researcher should not take the cheap overhead for registers in modern O-3 processors for granted. 
This serves as the motivation of this project, in which I will modify LLVM assembly generation routine to generate code with less registers than what is offered by the traditional LLVM compiler.  Furthermore, an informal comparison on the performance tradeoff based on the number of architectural registers is done.  

# What did I do?

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the amount of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  By executing the complied output from GCC, LLVM and modified LLVM,  I hope to unearth the relationship between architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmarking using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: complied -> compiled

# Results and Success?
The project is a success in that I am able to report the performance compression with both microbenchmarks and on a FFT benchmark with varying number of architectural registers. 
On the microbenchmarks, I have choosen to compare the number of architectural registers of matrix multiplication in scalar execution, SEE, AVX4 and AVX8 on x86 machine.  For each one of the implementations, they are being compiled by a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.    
The benchmark is primarily done by FFT and is implemented in SSE.   Thie code is compiled by three diffeent compilers: a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.     

> The benchmark is done on a 4 core i9-9900K CPU with 16 GB RAM in a Ubuntu VM.  The results are reported cycle count with rdtsc and execution time is reported as wall-clock time.  The results are verified by comparing the results of different implementations.

Reviewer: Maybe these are intended to be separate paragraphs too, requiring blank lines? You can preview the Markdown in using Zola if you're unsure how it will look.

> ## Microbenchmark w

Reviewer: Stray "w"?

| SSE                                     | 144.06                | 124.48 | 124.33       |
| AV_4mem                                 | 140.11                | 170.03 | 170.14       |
| AVX_8                                   | 93.48                 | 98.99  | 95.75        |

### Results and Analysis
As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result with a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts of register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the compiler backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance than the modification of the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

## FFT benchmark

### Process and Methology
The benchmark preforms a set of FFT calculations.  A total of 6 iterations have been performed and the data was preformed statistical analysis (Confidenace interval).  Execution time is measured in wall-clock time.

### Results

> Table 2, FFT benchmark in wall-clock time, average number secounds required to complete the operation.  

Reviewer: "secounds"

| Exec time (s) | GCC         | Clang       | Clang (0.75) |
|---------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|
| Average       | 2833314     | 2548542     | 3081897      |
| Min           | 2522625     | 2456454     | 2643296      |
| Std. Dev      | 381923      | 66116       | 497256       |
| CI-Lower(0.01)| 2431691     | 2479015     | 2558993      |
| CI-Upper(0.01)| 3234936     | 2618069     | 3604801      |
| CI-Lower(0.05)| 2527717     | 2495639     | 2684016      |

> | CI-Upper(0.05)| 3138911     | 2601446     | 3479778      |

Reviewer: I'm still confused about the units here. You say "average number secounds," but that's a *lot* of seconds! 2833314 seconds is 33 days, for example.

### Results and Analysis

> In the FFT benchmark, the modified version with fewer registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of GCC and Clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for GCC and modified Clang version. At 0.01 significance the confidence interval overlaps between the categories clang and modified Clang, therefore we conclude the performance differences between the group are not statistically significant. However, at 0.05 significance the results is statistically significant between original Clang and the modified Clang implementation.  In both cases, the performance difference between GCC and Clang are not statistically significant.  Despite the needed to have a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers for 0.01 significance level, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: "sub-set" -> subset

+++
title = "LLVM IR to Assembly"
[extra]
bio = """
   Socrates Wong is a second year PhD student at Cornell who interest lies in Computer Archicture.
"""
[[extra.authors]]
name = "Socrates Wong"
+++

> # Modifying LLVM’s IR to assembly on a existing ISA with different number of registers. 

Reviewer: Probably not necessary to have a second title here? Maybe this should be the overall `title` of the blog post (suitably Title Cased), whereas "LLVM IR to Assembly" is pretty vague.

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (the original x86), there were 8 registers and most of them are specialized. However in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 MMX registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors (O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers than what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advanced topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers than architectural registers.  

Reviewer: arbitrary -> arbitrarily

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (the original x86), there were 8 registers and most of them are specialized. However in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 MMX registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors (O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers than what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advanced topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers than architectural registers.  

Reviewer: registers -> registers'

> Most computer architectures have a fixed number of registers, and such number is often fixed and determined arbitrary.  Originally when 8086 was released (the original x86), there were 8 registers and most of them are specialized. However in most recent iterations of x86-64 it has total of 40, including 16 general purpose registers, 8 MMX registers, and 16 SSE registers.  As the registers area overhead in modern out of order processors (O3) are relatively small, it is often common practice to incorporate more registers than what is absolutely minimum to complete the task.   Many advanced topics in computing architecture such as simultaneous multithreading, Tomasulo algorithm, and speculative execution depend on the existence of having more physical registers than architectural registers.  

Reviewer: Tomasulo algorithm -> Tomasulo's algorithm

> This begs the question of do we actually need the number of registers offered by the modern ISA? Or can we go back to the traditional AX, BX, CX, DX, SI, DI, BP, SP registers?  Although at the current landscape in O-3 processors the incorporation of registers are relative cheap, such relationships may not hold true in other alternative processing methods. (PIM, GPGPU, DNA computing, quantum computing, et cetera)  Therefore such dimensions are worth a closer inspection, and that we as researcher should not take the cheap overhead for registers in modern O3 processors for granted. 

Reviewer: Maybe stay consistent about whether it's "O-3" or "O3."

> This begs the question of do we actually need the number of registers offered by the modern ISA? Or can we go back to the traditional AX, BX, CX, DX, SI, DI, BP, SP registers?  Although at the current landscape in O-3 processors the incorporation of registers are relative cheap, such relationships may not hold true in other alternative processing methods. (PIM, GPGPU, DNA computing, quantum computing, et cetera)  Therefore such dimensions are worth a closer inspection, and that we as researcher should not take the cheap overhead for registers in modern O3 processors for granted. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This begs the question of do we actually need the number of registers offered by the modern ISA? Or can we go back to the traditional AX, BX, CX, DX, SI, DI, BP, SP registers?  Although at the current landscape in O-3 processors the incorporation of registers are relative cheap, such relationships may not hold true in other alternative processing methods. (PIM, GPGPU, DNA computing, quantum computing, et cetera.)  Therefore such dimensions are worth a closer inspection, and that we as researcher should not take the cheap overhead for registers in modern O3 processors for granted. 
```

This serves as the motivation of this project, in which I will modify LLVM assembly generation routine to generate code with less registers than what is offered by the traditional LLVM compiler.  Furthermore, an informal comparison on the performance tradeoff based on the number of architectural registers is done.  

# What did I do?

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: number of aliasing -> amount of aliasing

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: Capitalize LLVM and GCC consistently.

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: "Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm." is a sentence fragment.

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: relationship of -> relationship between

> Although initially the project was to target the RISC-V ISA, but the current RISC-V Vector extensions currently still experimental and has an [outstanding pull request in Phabricator](https://reviews.llvm.org/rG5baef6353e8819e443d327f84edc9f2d1c8c0c9e) as of writing this blog post.  The lack of support in both LLVM side and the experimental status on the vector extension makes it hard for someone new to LLVM to effectly modify the praser in a resonable time, therefore I have decide to folow Adrian Sampson's advice in switching to x86 AVX and using that to benchmark. The plus side is that it is more mature and widely supported in the developer mailing list and the community.  However in retrospect it is something that I deeply regret as x86-64 is significently more complex.  This project is largely done by modifying the LLVM x86-64 target con figurations to create new target machine with different number of architectural registers.  Although X86-64 has better support across the LLVM stack, modifying the x86 machine target register configurations is no easy task and is significantly harder due to the number of aliasing it has across the different registers.   Most of the work that I have done on this project is modifying the LLVM assembly code generation to ulitizing different number of registers.  Then by executing the complied output from gcc, llvm and modified llvm.  I hope to unearth the relationship of architectural registers and performance.  To compare the results across multiple register types, I have done microbenchmark using Matrix Multiplication with three different x86-64 implementation (scalar, SSE, AVX-128bit, AVX-256bit) and benchmarking with FFT computations.  

Reviewer: microbenchmark -> microbenchmarking

# Hardest Part of the Project?

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and the codebase for x86 in LLVM relatively well maintained, the x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling conventions that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is a bad ISA, but the current LLVM codebase in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC compiler.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: widely adopted, used -> widely adopted and used (or just widely adopted)

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and the codebase for x86 in LLVM relatively well maintained, the x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling conventions that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is a bad ISA, but the current LLVM codebase in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC compiler.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: very painful implement -> very painful to implement

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and the codebase for x86 in LLVM relatively well maintained, the x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling conventions that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is a bad ISA, but the current LLVM codebase in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC compiler.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: from starch -> from scratch

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and the codebase for x86 in LLVM relatively well maintained, the x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling conventions that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is a bad ISA, but the current LLVM codebase in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC compiler.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: > I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.

I think everyone in the world agrees with this, i.e., that x86 is a bad ISA. We also know we are mostly stuck with it! But of course, it is the mission of RISC-V to change that status quo.

> It is not x86 is a bad ISA

Nah, x86 is definitely a bad ISA.

> X86-64 is the hardest part of the project.  Although it is widely adopted, used and the codebase for x86 in LLVM relatively well maintained, the x86-64 ISA is so complex and riddled with special rules and cases that makes any simple modification very painful implement.  It is furthermore complicated by the complexity of the different concurrent calling conventions that x86-64 practices.  Going back to our recent class discussion about rebuild or fix, I think x86 is really something we need consider razing and rebuilding from starch.  It is not x86 is a bad ISA, but the current LLVM codebase in x86 is full of legacy code and code to emulate “bugs” (or features) in GCC compiler.  Although this dates to the history of computer, this makes x86-64 very unfriendly for any new developers to work on it.  Another notable mention is the amount of effort it takes to demystify the target machine files in LLVM.  

Reviewer: "dates to the history of computer": not sure what you mean by this

# Results and Success?
The project is a success in that I am able to report the performance compression with both microbenchmarks and on a FFT benchmark with varying number of architectural registers. 
On the microbenchmarks, I have choosen to compare the number of architectural registers of matrix multiplication in scalar execution, SEE, AVX4 and AVX8 on x86 machine.  For each one of the implementations, they are being compiled by a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.    
The benchmark is primarily done by FFT and is implemented in SSE.   Thie code is compiled by three diffeent compliers: a unmodified version of GCC, unmodified version of clang, and a modified version of clang with only 75% of the original x86-64 registers.     
The benchmark is done on a 4 core i9-9900K CPU with 16 GB RAM in a Ubuntu VM.  The results are reported cycle count with rdtsc and execution time is reported as wall-clock time.  The results are verified by comparing the results of different implementations.

## Microbenchmark 

### Process and Methology

> The microbenchmark preforms a 4x4 matrix multiplication.  A total of 4096 itnerations have been preformed, and the results are aggerate by the minimum function.  Due to the small amount of cycle it takes to compelte the opereation, using wall-clock time may introduced another source of error, therefore I have elected to report the results in CPU cycles.

Reviewer: itnerations

> The microbenchmark preforms a 4x4 matrix multiplication.  A total of 4096 itnerations have been preformed, and the results are aggerate by the minimum function.  Due to the small amount of cycle it takes to compelte the opereation, using wall-clock time may introduced another source of error, therefore I have elected to report the results in CPU cycles.

Reviewer: results are aggerate -> results are aggregated

> The microbenchmark preforms a 4x4 matrix multiplication.  A total of 4096 itnerations have been preformed, and the results are aggerate by the minimum function.  Due to the small amount of cycle it takes to compelte the opereation, using wall-clock time may introduced another source of error, therefore I have elected to report the results in CPU cycles.

Reviewer: compelte (please run spell check)

> The microbenchmark preforms a 4x4 matrix multiplication.  A total of 4096 itnerations have been preformed, and the results are aggerate by the minimum function.  Due to the small amount of cycle it takes to compelte the opereation, using wall-clock time may introduced another source of error, therefore I have elected to report the results in CPU cycles.

Reviewer: may introduced -> may introduce

> The microbenchmark preforms a 4x4 matrix multiplication.  A total of 4096 itnerations have been preformed, and the results are aggerate by the minimum function.  Due to the small amount of cycle it takes to compelte the opereation, using wall-clock time may introduced another source of error, therefore I have elected to report the results in CPU cycles.

Reviewer: delete "therefore"

### Results

> Table 1, Microbenchmark of 4x4 matrix in CPU Cycles, 4096 trials, Minimum Number cycles required to complete the operation. 

Reviewer: How is it possible for a minimum cycle count to be fractional? Maybe this minimum is of an average of several executions?

| Microbenchmark 4x4   matrix             | gcc                   | clang  | clang (0.75) |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------|--------------|
| REF                                     | 227.76                | 214.98 | 214.8        |
| SSE                                     | 144.06                | 124.48 | 124.33       |
| AV_4mem                                 | 140.11                | 170.03 | 170.14       |
| AVX_8                                   | 93.48                 | 98.99  | 95.75        |

### Results and Analysis

> As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the complier backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance then the modification on the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

Reviewer: aggregate the result a min function -> aggregate the result *with* a min function

> As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the complier backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance then the modification on the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

Reviewer: high amounts register pressure -> high amounts *of* register pressure

> As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the complier backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance then the modification on the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

Reviewer: complier

> As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the complier backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance then the modification on the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

Reviewer: then -> than

> As this microbenchmark is designed to measure the maximum performance of the complied code, I have chosen to aggregate the result a min function. Preliminary analysis has shown that reducing the number of architectural registers has little or no effect on the performance on microbenchmarks.  This is as expected as microbenchmarks do not have high amounts register pressure as they often contain couple of register operands.  In this case, the complier backend implementation has more of an impact on the final performance then the modification on the number of x86-64 architectural registers.  

Reviewer: modification on -> modification of

## FFT benchmark:

### Process and Methology

> The benchmark preforms a set of FET calculations.  A total of 6 interactions have been performed and the data was preformed statistical analysis.  Execution time is measured in wall-clock time.

Reviewer: preforms -> performs

> The benchmark preforms a set of FET calculations.  A total of 6 interactions have been performed and the data was preformed statistical analysis.  Execution time is measured in wall-clock time.

Reviewer: "FET"

> The benchmark preforms a set of FET calculations.  A total of 6 interactions have been performed and the data was preformed statistical analysis.  Execution time is measured in wall-clock time.

Reviewer: "6 interactions": not sure what you mean here… iterations?

> The benchmark preforms a set of FET calculations.  A total of 6 interactions have been performed and the data was preformed statistical analysis.  Execution time is measured in wall-clock time.

Reviewer: "the data was preformed statistical analysis": also not sure what you mean here… what sort of statistical analysis?

### Results

> Table 2, FET benchmark in wall-clock time,average number cycles required to complete the operation.  

Reviewer: "FET"

> Table 2, FET benchmark in wall-clock time,average number cycles required to complete the operation.  

Reviewer: missing space in "time,average"

> Table 2, FET benchmark in wall-clock time,average number cycles required to complete the operation.  

Reviewer: I'm still confused here. Is this cycles or seconds? It looks like cycles, but then why the mention of wall-clock time?

| Exec time (s) | gcc         | clang       | clang (0.75) |
|---------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|
| Average       | 2833314     | 2548542     | 3081897      |
| Min           | 2522625     | 2456454     | 2643296      |
| Std. Dev      | 381923      | 66116       | 497256       |
| CI-Lower(0.01)| 2431691     | 2479015     | 2558993      |
| CI-Upper(0.01)| 3234936     | 2618069     | 3604801      |
| CI-Lower(0.05)| 2527717     | 2495639     | 2684016      |
| CI-Upper(0.05)| 3138911     | 2601446     | 3479778      |

### Results and Analysis

> In the FFT benchmark, the modified version with fewer registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of GCC and Clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for GCC and modified Clang version. At 0.01 significant the confidence interval overlaps between the categories clang and modified Clang , therefore we conclude the performance differences between group is not statistically significant. However, at 0.05 significance the results is statistically significant between original Clang and the modified Clang implementation.  In both cases, the performance difference between GCC and Clang are not statistically significant.  Despite the needed to have a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers for 0.01 significance level, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: 0.01 significant -> 0.01 significance

> In the FFT benchmark, the modified version with fewer registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of GCC and Clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for GCC and modified Clang version. At 0.01 significant the confidence interval overlaps between the categories clang and modified Clang , therefore we conclude the performance differences between group is not statistically significant. However, at 0.05 significance the results is statistically significant between original Clang and the modified Clang implementation.  In both cases, the performance difference between GCC and Clang are not statistically significant.  Despite the needed to have a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers for 0.01 significance level, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: remove space in "Clang ,"

> In the FFT benchmark, the modified version with fewer registers consistently underperforms unmodified versions of GCC and Clang.  However, something of note worth is the minimum time needed for execution is relatively close for GCC and modified Clang version. At 0.01 significant the confidence interval overlaps between the categories clang and modified Clang , therefore we conclude the performance differences between group is not statistically significant. However, at 0.05 significance the results is statistically significant between original Clang and the modified Clang implementation.  In both cases, the performance difference between GCC and Clang are not statistically significant.  Despite the needed to have a greater sample size to have statically significant numbers for 0.01 significance level, and the need of a more comprehensive benchmark to identify the patterns and implications of reducing the number of architectural registers.  I have nevertheless demonstrated the ability to modify LLVM to generate assembly with a sub-set of all the original ISA registers.  

Reviewer: the performance differences between group is not statistically significant: is -> are; add "the" before "group"

> #Future Works?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Future Works?
```

> There is couple of steps I will need to accomplish in the future.  The first and foremost is to abandon x86-64.  Although using x86-64 makes it a good academic exercise, it is nonetheless riddled with special exceptions and tons of specialized requirement to ensure support for legacy software.  This makes it very detrimental when attempting to isolate the performance gains and penalty.  The second point I would like to address is to use of a simulator to report the performance.   Compare to a live system with other workload, the simulator is both deterministic and is able to support multiple configurations to furthermore narrow down what really cause the performance decrease when the number of architectural registers decrease.  Lastly the incorporation of a comprehensive test bench to ensure that different workloads are fairly represented in the benchmarking.  

Reviewer: There is couple of steps -> There are a couple of steps
